# CSE 284 Project --- Comparing IBD Detection Methods for Relative Finding

## Project Summary
This project compares two identity-by-descent (IBD) detection methods used for identifying genetic relatives: PLINK, a genotype-based approach, and GERMLINE, a haplotype-based method. Using subsets of the 1000 Genomes Project dataset, I evaluate the performance of these two methods in terms of both accuracy and computational efficiency. PLINK estimates pairwise relatedness using genotype similarity statistics, whereas GERMLINE identifies shared haplotype segments that indicate inheritance from a common ancestor. By comparing PLINK’s IBD proportion statistics with the IBD segment lengths detected by GERMLINE, and validating results against the ground-truth pedigree information available for known relatives, this project examines how effectively the two approaches detect related individuals across different population groups.

## Dataset
The dataset used in this project comes from the 1000 Genomes Project, specifically the expanded collection containing 3,202 individuals from 26 populations. While the original dataset includes 2,504 unrelated individuals, the expanded release adds 698 individuals with known pedigree relationships, including parent–child trios. Because related individuals are relatively rare in the dataset and most populations contain only a small number of related pairs, the analysis focuses on four specific populations in order to reduce computational cost and enable clearer comparisons:
- Luhya in Kenya (LWK)
- Yoruba in Nigeria (YRI)
- Finnish in Finland (FIN)
- Southern Han Chinese (CHS)

The two African populations are included because they are frequently used as reference populations with high genetic diversity. The Finnish population represents a recently bottlenecked population, while the Southern Han Chinese population represents a large and moderately diverse East Asian population. The analysis is restricted to chromosome 10. Before running either IBD detection method, the raw data are processed to retain only biallelic SNP sites. The data are then subset by population to generate separate input files for downstream analysis.

The processing step is completed by calling
```bash
bash scripts/process.sh
```

Pedigree files for CHS and YRI populations are generated by calling
```bash
python scripts/pedigree.py
```

The repository has the following file structure
```
.
├── data/                     # 1000G VCF, panel, and pedigree files
├── germline/                 # Processed data and results file for GERMLINE analysis
├── plink/                    # Processed data and results file for PLINK analysis
├── scripts/
│   ├── process.sh                     # Process raw phased VCF file 
│   ├── plink.sh                       # PLINK data preparation and analysis
│   ├── germline.sh                    # GERMLINE data preparation and analysis
│   ├── plot_analysis.ipynb            # Visualization
│   └── pedigree.py                    # Generate pedigree file for populations
├── figures/                  # Figures from analysis
└── README.md
```

## Analysis
The analysis can be executed using the following scripts:
```bash
# Run PLINK analysis
bash scripts/plink.sh

# Run GERMLINE analysis
bash scripts/germline.sh
```
The PLINK pipeline produces a ```.genome``` file containing pairwise relatedness statistics, while the GERMLINE pipeline produces a ```.match``` file containing detected IBD segments. The GERMLINE command can also take bits (slice size) and min_m (minimum length for match identification) as parameters, with default values `bits=(8 16)` and `min_m=(0.01 1)`. The default value used in GERMLINE 1.9 are `bits=128` and `min_m=3`. The user can specify `bits` and `min_m` values as follows:
```bash
# Specify bits values
bash scripts/germline.sh --bits 4 64

# Specify min_m values
bash scripts/germline.sh --min_m 3 6

# Specify both values
bash scripts/germline.sh --bits 4 8 --min_m 1 3
```

For each `bits` and `min_m` pair, the GERMLINE script will generate a separate `.match` file with the `bits` and `min_m` values in the file name. This makes downstream analysis easier but can be memory intensive if searching over a large grid.

To compare the two methods, the notebook ```plot_analysis.ipynb``` aggregates the total shared IBD segment length for each pair of individuals detected by GERMLINE. These values are then compared with the IBD proportion estimates from PLINK, allowing a direct visualization of how the two approaches measure genetic relatedness.

Specifically, because the LWK and FIN populations do not include close relatives, they are best suited to examine how well PLINK and GERMLINE capture background relatedness. The CHS and YRI populations, on the other hand, are better suited to analyze how well both methods distinguish close relative pairs/trios from unrelated relationships. See the ```Relative Finding.PDF``` for a sample notebook output.

